very much surprised at how peaceful things seemed
to be. It had no sense of impending doom or
anything. Can you carry us from that point till you
got back to your hotel? One of the things that I was
thinking was I wish that our whole family was there
so that they could see what's going on. There's no
way, I knew there was no way I could explain how
peaceful and how cooperative these people were
because many times when we were over here, Very
seldom do we see people helping each other out,
people united in a common cause, a common idea. And
even when you would try to get on a Chinese bus, it
was survival of the fittest. And they would run
over you to get onto the bus. But here, you had more
people in a potentially dangerous situation, but
they were very calm. They were very helpful to each
other. It just, it was something that we had never
experienced. You're comparing the crowd in June
of 1989 as peaceful and calm compared to the daily
activity, crowds, and movement in Beijing back in
your 85, 86 school year. Yes, yes. I said there were
more people, and I said there were just, you could
see that these people, although I could not
understand what they were saying, that they were
pleading with these troops not to go into
Tiananmen Square. You felt that's what they were
doing? Oh, yeah. There was no doubt in my mind. They
were trying to tell these troops that these were
people down in Tiananmen Square, students and
otherwise, and that they were not ruffians or
hooligans that were causing destruction or
anything like that, and trying to explain the
general situation and what was going on. It was a
very... friendly type of thing. The soldiers were
doing more listening than talking, and they had a
rather solemn look on their face for the most part,
but it was not what it could have been and what I
could have imagined as a confrontational type of
situation, even though there were, I would guess
here at this intersection by this time, there were
maybe 5,000 to 10,000 people, because they
literally covered This whole interchange there
was thick with people.
But I said it was a very peaceful atmosphere. And
people did not seem to be afraid. I mean, when
somebody's afraid, you can see it in their eyes.
You can see it in the way they were acting. And these
people were not acting that way. It was a very
friendly type of thing. And the Chinese people,
they love their children. They're not going to put
their children what they would feel is a
potentially dangerous situation. Yet there were
children all over. They were playing on the grass
nearby, and walking around, and children talking
with troops too. So it was a very peaceful setting.
So you were still walking, still heading for the
taxi? So about 9.30, I figured, well, you know, I
better go ahead and get back again. Nothing out of
the ordinary seemed to be happening. So I walked on
to the Friendship store. It was closed by this
time, so there weren't any taxis there, so I had to
go down to one of the foreign hotels that's a little
bit further on. And there were a couple of taxis
there, but they weren't too enthused about taking
someone somewhere, so I had to bargain with this
guy. He wanted 50 or 60 yuan to take me what is
usually a 15 yuan drive. He said, oh yeah, but
there's a lot of demonstrators out and stuff. So we
bargained down to 25 yuan to take me over to my
hotel. What was the name of your hotel again? I was
at the Kunlun Hotel, which is in the northeast side
of the city. So I got into the cab. And he started
down one of the main streets of parallels, that
ring road, to get over to where my hotel was. And we
came on. There weren't a whole lot of people out in
the street. We came on one intersection where the
students or the people had pulled buses across to
block this main street. There were about a half a
dozen buses in kind of a half-moon shape so that
they'd block the street that we were on on the other
side of the intersection and the two that were
coming in. Figured that if convoys tried to come in
that way, they wouldn't be able to get around that.
But fortunately, there was enough space that he
could get the car between two of the buses. And you
have the main street, and then they have these
separate bicycle lanes on the side. And a lot of
times there's a divider with some grass that's in
between the main street and the bicycle lane. He
had to go over the bicycle lane to go down that. But
it was to get back on the street after we got past
that. So I got back to the hotel then until about 10
o'clock in the evening, Beijing time, and called
home. to tell my wife and the kids that everything
was okay. I felt I couldn't tell them that I'd just
been down to the square and I'd just run into a bunch
of troops. You felt you couldn't tell them? I felt I
could not. Number one, because you don't know who
may be listening in on the phone. And I did not want
to draw any suspicion on myself. But you didn't
have any difficulty making the phone call out. I
didn't have any difficulty making the phone call
out. And my daughter answered the phone. And my
wife had just taken our youngest son to his t-ball
game. But I told my daughter, I said, hey, you know,
everything's fine. You know, just, you know, come
on over. And I tried to explain without telling her
where I had been and what I had done. I tried to tell
her to bring along some extra cash. So because one
of the things that the students needed was money,
and particularly with dollars in that, they could
get a lot more in terms of food and things like that.
I wanted to have that ability to make some
donations, but I needed cash rather than
traveler's checks. So without telling her what I
wanted it for, I was trying to explain to bring that
over and wanted them to bring some Texas A&M
t-shirts over so that we could get our pictures
taken in front of the Goddess of Democracy with our
A&M t-shirts. And as we were talking, and
apparently she had been watching television, she
said that they had just broken in on the news and
said that there was some shooting going on in
Beijing. And I told her, I said, well, if there is,
that must be an isolated incident that wasn't
really... and that everything was peaceful. Now,
she's watching TV on Sunday night? No, this was
Saturday morning here. It was Saturday night in
Beijing. It was Saturday morning back here in the
state. So she,
I told her everything was fine, and, you know, to
tell her mother that everything was okay and we
were coming over. So I went ahead and went to bed,
and then about An hour later, my wife had gotten
back from the T-ball
game. She called me and said, you know, are you sure
that everything's okay? Because they're talking
about some real shooting going on. And I said,
well, you know, I can't, I was on the northeast
side. I was about two and a half, three miles away
from Tiananmen Square. I couldn't hear anything
in my room. And I told her, you know, I thought
everything was okay, but I, as it turned out, I was
in one of the few hotels in Beijing that has a
satellite hookup to CNN. And so I said, you know
what, I'll turn on the TV and see what I can see from
here. And instructed her to go ahead and call me
early Sunday morning, Beijing time, which would
be Saturday evening, her time, so that we could
assess the situation to see what's going on.
early on Sunday morning, she was going to have to
drive to Houston, Sunday morning Houston time,
drive to Houston to take our kids and put them on the
plane. So, I then stayed up that night watching
CNN, watching what was going on, and was as
horrified as, you know, everybody back in the
States, as to why I was just, and thinking, you
know, I was just, I was just down there, and piecing
things together, since I've been back, realized
that just about the time that I left that group on
the east side of Tiananmen Square, another group
of soldiers from this unit that was in Mongolia had
come down Chong Lin Avenue from the west side. And
when the people came out to stop them, just as they
had done to this convoy that I had been with, those
guys didn't stop. They opened fire. on the people
and ran over people and continued down on to in the
Tiananmen Square. And that apparently was the
shooting that my daughter had first heard being
reported. I do know that later that night, early
Sunday morning, in that area where I was, that
that's where some of the tanks came through. Now,
there's no way of knowing whether the troops that I
saw then ended up shooting at the people who were
around there or they remained peaceful and did not
shoot. One of the things that I have found out since
returning was that those soldiers were told by
their commanders that when they were given the
order to shoot, they better shoot. And if they
didn't, that the commander would kill them right
on the spot. As a matter of fact, that And where did
you obtain that information? I obtained
information from a lot of different sources, from
contacts, from some,
there were four students, a newspaper, people
from Hong Kong who were in the square that night.
And they were, they came to A&M. afterwards to
discuss their experiences and from other
contexts that I know but feel that for their own
safety that I shouldn't identify them can I take
you back then to when you're in the hotel in the
middle of the night watching the television
coverage what was probably the most vivid scene
that you remember from watching television at
that point in time they they were showing mainly
still pictures. Of course, the government was
trying its best to keep the news media from being
able to send out information. And there wasn't any
one in particular that stands out. The thought
that kept going through my mind was the fact that I
had just been down there and things were so
peaceful. And that The only thought in my mind was
how desperate the hard lines, the government,
Deng Xiaoping, Li Peng, and that, were to maintain
their power. Because this was an act of sheer
desperation. I was convinced that it was not a case
where the people had turned unruly and had forced
the army into a situation where they needed a
machine to protect themselves. It was clear in my
mind, and piecing things together since I've come
back, very clear that the government had made the
cold-blooded, calculated decision to go in there
and to clear the square by whatever violent means
were necessary. Okay, so you were watching
television, hearing commotion in the hotel? What
did you finally do with the phone call to your wife?
There was not a lot of commotion going to the hotel
because there weren't a whole lot of people in the
hotel. Tourism had been cut down drastically
because of that. I couldn't help but think about
the people that I'd seen down in the square and
wondering if they had left already, that little
boy that I'd seen, his mother, and the The high
school girl in the back was a translator. I
couldn't help but wondering if they were still
there, if they were part of what was going on, if
they had been able to get out of there. My wife was
able to get a hold of me the next morning, and we both
agreed that it was not wise to put the kids on the
plane. Even though they wanted to come, we felt
that it would be much safer and easier for me to get
out of there if I just had to worry about myself. So
you made this decision over the phone early Sunday
morning. Yeah, and I said this was this was about
five or six hours before she would have gotten in
the car and taken down to the Houston airport and I
told her that my plans were that I was going to that
there was nothing open on Sunday. There was no way
that I could make any arrangements to get out early
on Sunday. As it turned out, I had, whatever
possible, do not want to fly the Chinese airline,
fly other airlines. So I had all foreign travel,
except my daughter was going to, when we left, we
were going to stop in Hong Kong, and she was going to
stay an extra week with one of her friends that she
had gone to school with when they were in Beijing.
So we had already booked a flight for the following
Sunday to go from Beijing to Hong Kong. We had to fly
the Chinese airline for that leg, which turned out
to be good in that I had a ticket then on the Chinese
airline from Beijing to Hong Kong, and they had an
office There was the Great Royal Hotel a block away
from where I was staying, whereas all the other
foreign airlines, the only place that they had
their offices were down in the hotels near
Tiananmen Square. So I did not want to go down to
that part of the city. So I told them that on Monday
morning, they would open at 9 o'clock, and then I
would be over there, you know, when they opened, be
one of the first people there, and see if I could get
out early. You know, if I couldn't, that... I felt
that I was safe enough or that I knew of where I
could, you know, places to hide, stuff like that,
that I would just wait, you know, get out on the
following Sunday. But to have instructed her to
call me back around noon on Monday, Beijing time,
because that way hopefully I would have
information to be able to tell her what
arrangements, if any, I'd been able to make. So,
the Sunday I continued to watch CNN, and they were
beginning to get more coverage and pictures of
what was going on. And I said, I knew that what we're
dealing here with was a desperate government that
was acting in a very desperate way to maintain its
power. So before that, I felt that I could probably
judge and predict what was going to happen
sufficiently ahead of time to be able to get out of
any danger. But here, you were acting You were
dealing with people who were completely
irrational, illogical. And the troops were, even
though I, by watching CNN, knew where the main
concentrations of what was going on, where they
were, they still had patrols that were going
around the city. And those patrols, if they saw a
group of people, they might decide to just open up
and start shooting at them. So I knew it was not safe
to Too much traveling around the city. As a matter
of fact, my plans originally, I was supposed to,
one Sunday afternoon, I was supposed to change
hotels and go over to the west side of town and stay
in the place where we had lived before. And that's
where our kids were going to stay with me. That was
the Friendship Hotel? The Friendship Hotel. But
realized that that's also where Beijing
University and People's University and a lot of
universities are. And that the military, once
they got things under control in Tiananmen
Square, that they were going to head for the
university. So I made arrangements to go ahead and
continue on in the hotel, in the Canoon Hotel,
where I was. I ventured out a couple of times, just a
little bit, right around the hotel there. There
was very little traffic. on what's normally going
on on Sunday. But you begin to see some people kind
of clustered together in small groups, I think,
passing on information about what was going on
down in Tiananmen Square. Again, the government
controls all the news media, and of course they
weren't admitting what was going on. The only way
people knew was by word of mouth and people
spreading the word, not getting it in
conventional ways by seeing what's going on in
television news. or what have you. And I also
realized that from our previous day that
contacting our embassy and asking for their help
to get out of there was a waste of my time because
those people, they don't know what's going on. And
my suspicions were confirmed both by my own
personal experience. When I did get out, I met some
people who as late as Monday afternoon our embassy
was advising American tourists to continue to
come to Beijing if there was no problem. Okay, so
the embassy is not something you tried to contact.
No. You're still then in contact in trying to get
this flight out to Hong Kong. I went to sleep that
night. I watched TV on and off. And then Monday
morning, got up, ate a good breakfast, and went
over to the Great Wall Sheraton Hotel. and was one
of the first there to get in line. I think that
because of my having been there before, I was one of
the few foreigners that realized the seriousness
of the situation. It wasn't until late Tuesday or
Wednesday that the other Americans and tourists
in that realized how dangerous the situation was
and tried to get out. So there was a group of 15 or 20
of us there who most of them were people who were
working for corporations and that who had been in
Beijing for a number of months and lived there and
they realized how serious the things were and were
trying to get out. I couldn't get a flight out on
Monday. The earliest one that I could get changed
to was a flight that left early Tuesday morning.
There were actually two flights. One went
directly from Beijing to Hong Kong and the other
one from Beijing to Tianjin which is a major port
city in China. It's on the coast about 120 miles
from Beijing. But it went from Beijing to Tianjin
to Hong Kong. So I had the lady go ahead and change my
ticket and put me on that flight. Now, I'm somewhat
concerned because China does not have the tourist
and travel facilities we have here. We just call
them a travel agent. Through the computers, they
can book flights and reservations anywhere you
want. The Chinese still did not have round-trip
tickets. They're just now beginning to get some of
their major ticket offices hooked together by a
computer. So even though this lady had on her
computer, she had put it in, I wasn't sure, I wasn't
comfortable that it had been confirmed out of the
airport. Your skepticism grew a little bit out of
your previous experiences with Reagan. Okay,
China. So I went back to the hotel, and my wife was
able to get through until about 12, 30, quarter to
1. It was still easier for people from outside to
call in than it was for us to call out. Did you try to
call out? I had tried to call out once earlier, but I
couldn't get a line. I couldn't get an outside
line. So she got in, and I told her what my plans were
and that, I was concerned about being able to get
out to the airport because, as I said, it's outside
of town. And there were very few buses that were
running. There really weren't any buses that you
could take directly out to the airport anyway. But
there were also very few taxis. Usually at the
hotels, there was one of 20 or 30 taxis. Sunday and
Monday, I'd only seen two or three that had come by
and were dropping people off. There weren't a lot
of taxis out there. I didn't want to... alarm her
too much, but I told her, you know, what I was going
to do is I was just going to go ahead after I finished
talking with her, and I was going to go out to the
airport, you know, I'd sleep out there tonight, so
that way I'd be out there, so in case the military
decided they were going to close off the city or
something, you know, that I'd at least be outside
the city. And I assured her that, you know, I knew my
way around, and she felt comfortable with that
because we lived there. She knew by watching
television back here what was going on you know,
where the troops were, where the action was, and,
you know, that I had some friends there, and that,
you know, I had a good chance of being able to take
care of myself. And both of us, I think, as we look
back, felt unusually comfortable. Wasn't really
scared or too worried at that point in time. We both
feel that... that the Lord was with us and was... I
could have very easily been down in Tiananmen
Square. I could have run into troops that were
shooting at me and felt comfortable in that sense,
that it felt like the Lord was taking care of me as I
was going through all this. So after I finished
talking with her, I went downstairs and ate a big
meal at the hotel because I didn't know when I'd get
my next one. They also had a small grocery store
there in the hotel. I went in there and bought a
couple of canned hams, some bottled water, some
Vienna sausage type things, and some crackers,
and some bread type stuff. And then went up to my
room and rearranged my stuff. I had a light
bag that
I put that I could carry very easily. I put some of
the food in there and some of the things that I felt
were more necessities in my bigger, hard-sided
bag. I put things that I could do without if I had to
ditch that. And I
went to the desk and changed some of my money into
dollars, got some dollars. You have to convert
into foreign exchange. I got some of that. I had
some Chinese local currency, and I also had some
dollars. And I spread those around on my body and in
my different bags so that if I was separated from
one of them, I wouldn't have all my eggs in one
basket, so to speak. And I brought along a Swiss
Army knife because that's helpful in the as we
found out before, and fortunately had that with
me, so I put that in my pocket. And then went down and
waited for a cab, and fortunately, about half an
hour after I got out there, somebody was coming to,
because tourists, American tourists, were still
arriving Monday afternoon, and I talked back and
had to bargain with this guy again, but got him to
take me out to the airport, I was somewhat
concerned because normally there's just a taxi
driver. But in this cab, there was a taxi driver.
There was a friend of his also sitting in the front
seat. And I was concerned that these guys might try
to rob me or they might take me out somewhere and
leave me off there. But it was the only cab that had
come around. So I figured I'd go ahead and take a
chance. And so I got in the back seat. I let him put
the heavy bag in the trunk, but I kept the other kind
of carry-on bag type thing with me. And I had my
pocket knife. That would have done me, I don't
know, but easily accessible to me. And we got into
the cab and we started going out there. And the
driver knew a little bit of English and started a
little bit of a conversation. And he had... a copy
of a fax that they had received earlier in the day
from Hong Kong. What the students and the people in
Beijing were doing was they were getting most of
their information from outside China, from Hong
Kong. And what they would do was in Hong Kong, they
would watch what was going on from the news and from
their contacts, the people that they knew, and
then they would write it out in Chinese
characters. Then they would fax it to Beijing, and
then people are sympathetic to the
demonstrations. They would take them, and they
would run off copies, which is very difficult to
get access to a copy machine in China. It's not like
here, where you just run down to Kiko's or
someplace, four cents a copy place. And they would
make copies, and then they would, as I mentioned,
the students were distributing these, putting
them on light poles and stuff like that. But this
guy had a stack of them, and he gave me one of them,
which I've had translated since I came back. And it
was dealing with the massacre that's going on
Saturday night, Sunday morning. It was square,
what was going on, Tiananmen Square. And as we were
going, I knew, again, because I'd been there, I
knew the general streets and the general
directions. So I was watching very carefully as to
where these guys were taking me, so that I could
tell if they were taking me or not. But they were
going the route that you would go to get out there.
And on two occasions, we passed a major
intersection where there were several trucks of
troops over on the side. And they were armed, but
they weren't out there blocking off the street or
that. They were just kind of camped over to the
side. Well, the second group that we came up to was
at the intersection of the road that goes out to the
airport.
lido the holiday inn is located right there on that
intersection there were about four trucks they
were there the troops they were out they were they
were eating and mulling around and the driver as we
started to go on this intersection he started
rolling down his window and grabbed one of these
faxes to give these soldiers and i thought you know
this guy is going to get us killed right here and I
was glad that his friend was in the front seat with
him because his friend kind of, you know, nudged
him on the arm and, you know, shook his head, you
know, don't do this. And so he turned all over on the
seat next to us so that even somebody looking in
couldn't see him and rolled the window back up and
we drove on. And it was great news with that. We got
out to the airport. It was about 4 o'clock in the
afternoon. And one time I see the
United Airlines flight that my kids were supposed
to come in. It was supposed to get into Beijing
Monday night. And what it does is it's coming and
going.